
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA /ˈnæsə/) is an independent agency of the U.S.
federal government responsible for the civilian space program,
as well as aeronautics and space research.

NASA was established in 1958, succeeding the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA).
The new agency was to have a distinctly civilian orientation, encouraging peaceful applications in space science.
Since its establishment, most US space exploration efforts have been led by NASA, including the Apollo Moon landing missions,
the Skylab space station, and later the Space Shuttle.
NASA is supporting the International Space Station and is overseeing the development of the Orion spacecraft, the Space Launch System,
and Commercial Crew vehicles. 
The agency is also responsible for the Launch Services Program,
which provides oversight of launch operations and countdown management for uncrewed NASA launches.

NASA science is focused on better understanding Earth through the Earth Observing System,
advancing heliophysics through the efforts of the Science Mission Directorate's Heliophysics Research Program exploring bodies throughout 
the Solar System with advanced robotic spacecraft such as New Horizons
and researching astrophysics topics, such as the Big Bang, through the Great Observatories and associated programs.



*-Creation
Main article: Creation of NASA
File:NASA 60th- How It All Began.webm
Short documentary about NASA
From 1946, the National Advisory Committee for Aeronautics (NACA) had been experimenting with rocket planes such as the supersonic Bell X-1.
In the early 1950s, there was challenge to launch an artificial satellite for the International Geophysical Year (1957–1958). 
An effort for this was the American Project Vanguard. After the Soviet space program's launch of the world's first artificial satellite (Sputnik 1) on October 4, 1957,
the attention of the United States turned toward its own fledgling space efforts. 
The U.S. Congress, alarmed by the perceived threat to national security and technological leadership (known as the "Sputnik crisis"), 
urged immediate and swift action; President Dwight D. Eisenhower counseled more deliberate measures. 
The result was a consensus that the White House forged among key interest groups, 
including scientists committed to basic research; the Pentagon which had to match the Soviet military achievement; 
corporate America looking for new business; and a strong new trend in public opinion looking up to space exploration.

-On January 12, 1958, NACA organized a "Special Committee on Space Technology", headed by Guyford Stever. 
-On January 14, 1958, NACA Director Hugh Dryden published "A National Research Program for Space Technology" stating:

It is of great urgency and importance to our country both from consideration of our prestige as a nation as well as military necessity that this challenge [Sputnik] be met by an energetic program of research and development for the conquest of space ... 
It is accordingly proposed that the scientific research be the responsibility of a national civilian agency ... 
NACA is capable, by rapid extension and expansion of its effort, of providing leadership in space technology.

While this new federal agency would conduct all non-military space activity, the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) 
was created in February 1958 to develop space technology for military application.

-On July 29, 1958, Eisenhower signed the National Aeronautics and Space Act, 
establishing NASA. When it began operations on October 1, 1958, NASA absorbed the 43-year-old NACA intact; 
its 8,000 employees, an annual budget of US$100 million, three major research laboratories (Langley Aeronautical Laboratory, 
Ames Aeronautical Laboratory, and Lewis Flight Propulsion Laboratory) and two small test facilities.
Elements of the Army Ballistic Missile Agency and the United States Naval Research Laboratory were incorporated into NASA. 
A significant contributor to NASA's entry into the Space Race with the Soviet Union was the technology from the German rocket program led by Wernher von Braun, 
who was now working for the Army Ballistic Missile Agency (ABMA), which in turn incorporated the technology of American scientist Robert Goddard's earlier works.
Earlier research efforts within the US Air Force and many of ARPA's early space programs were also transferred to NASA.
In December 1958, NASA gained control of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, a contractor facility operated by the California Institute of Technology.

-Insignia
Main article: NASA insignia
The NASA seal was approved by Eisenhower in 1959, and slightly modified by President John F. 
Kennedy in 1961.[21][22] NASA's first logo was designed by the head of Lewis' Research Reports Division, 
James Modarelli, as a simplification of the 1959 seal.
In 1975, the original logo was first dubbed "the meatball" to distinguish it from the newly designed "worm" logo which replaced it. 
The "meatball" returned to official use in 1992. The "worm" was brought out of retirement in 2020 by administrator Jim Bridenstine.

-Foundational human spaceflight
-X-15 program (1954–1968)
Main article: North American X-15

-X-15 in powered flight
NASA inherited NACA's X-15 experimental rocket-powered hypersonic research aircraft, developed in conjunction with the US Air Force and Navy. 
Three planes were built starting in 1955. The X-15 was drop-launched from the wing of one of two NASA Boeing B-52 Stratofortresses, 
NB52A tail number 52-003, and NB52B, tail number 52-008 (known as the Balls 8). 
Release took place at an altitude of about 45,000 feet (14 km) and a speed of about 500 miles per hour (805 km/h).[citation needed]

Twelve pilots were selected for the program from the Air Force, Navy, and NACA. 
A total of 199 flights were made between June 1959 and December 1968, 
resulting in the official world record for the highest speed ever reached by a crewed powered aircraft (current as of 2014),
and a maximum speed of Mach 6.72, 4,519 miles per hour (7,273 km/h). The altitude record for X-15 was 354,200 feet (107.96 km).
Eight of the pilots were awarded Air Force astronaut wings for flying above 260,000 feet (80 km), and two flights by Joseph A. Walker 
exceeded 100 kilometers (330,000 ft), qualifying as spaceflight according to the International Aeronautical Federation. 
The X-15 program employed mechanical techniques used in the later crewed spaceflight programs, 
including reaction control system jets for controlling the orientation of a spacecraft, 
space suits, and horizon definition for navigation.[26] The reentry and landing data collected were valuable to NASA for designing the Space Shuttle.

-Project Mercury (1958–1963)
Main article: Project Mercury

L. Gordon Cooper, photographed by a slow-scan television camera aboard Faith 7, 1963
In 1958, NASA formed an engineering group, the Space Task Group, to manage their human spaceflight programs under the 
direction of Robert Gilruth. Their earliest programs were conducted under the pressure of the Cold War competition 
between the U.S. and the Soviet Union. NASA inherited the US Air Force's Man in Space Soonest program, 
which considered many crewed spacecraft designs ranging from rocket planes like the X-15, to small ballistic space 
capsules.By 1958, the space plane concepts were eliminated in favor of the ballistic capsule,
and NASA renamed it Project Mercury. The first seven astronauts were selected among candidates from the Navy, 
Air Force and Marine test pilot programs. On May 5, 1961, astronaut Alan Shepard became the first 
American in space aboard a capsule he named Freedom 7, launched on a Redstone booster on 
a 15-minute ballistic (suborbital) flight.[30] John Glenn became the first American to be launched into orbit, 
on an Atlas launch vehicle on February 20, 1962, aboard Friendship 7. Glenn completed three orbits, 
after which three more orbital flights were made, culminating in L. Gordon Cooper's 22-orbit flight Faith 7, 
May 15–16, 1963. Katherine Johnson, Mary Jackson, and Dorothy Vaughan were three of the human computers
 doing calculations on trajectories during the Space Race. Johnson was well known for doing trajectory 
 calculations for John Glenn's mission in 1962, where she was running the same equations by hand that were being run on 
 the computer

Mercury's competition from the Soviet Union (USSR) was the single-pilot Vostok spacecraft. They sent the first man in space, cosmonaut Yuri Gagarin, into a single Earth orbit aboard Vostok 1 in April 1961, one month before Shepard's flight.[36] In August 1962, they achieved an almost four-day record flight with Andriyan Nikolayev aboard Vostok 3, and also conducted a concurrent Vostok 4 mission carrying Pavel Popovich.

-Project Gemini (1961–1966)
Main article: Project Gemini

Richard Gordon performs a spacewalk to attach a tether to the Agena Target Vehicle on Gemini 11, 1966
Based on studies to grow the Mercury spacecraft capabilities to long-duration flights, developing space rendezvous techniques, and precision Earth landing, Project Gemini was started as a two-man program in 1961 to overcome the Soviets' lead and to support the Apollo crewed lunar landing program, adding extravehicular activity (EVA) and rendezvous and docking to its objectives. The first crewed Gemini flight, Gemini 3, was flown by Gus Grissom and John Young on March 23, 1965.[37] Nine missions followed in 1965 and 1966, demonstrating an endurance mission of nearly fourteen days, rendezvous, docking, and practical EVA, and gathering medical data on the effects of weightlessness on humans.[38][39]

Under the direction of Soviet Premier Nikita Khrushchev, the USSR competed with Gemini by converting their Vostok spacecraft into a two- or three-man Voskhod. They succeeded in launching two crewed flights before Gemini's first flight, achieving a three-cosmonaut flight in 1964 and the first EVA in 1965. After this, the program was canceled, and Gemini caught up while spacecraft designer Sergei Korolev developed the Soyuz spacecraft, their answer to Apollo.

-Project Apollo (1960–1972)
Main article: Apollo program

Buzz Aldrin on the Moon, 1969
The U.S public's perception of the Soviet lead in the Space Race (by putting the first man into space) motivated President John F. Kennedy[40] to ask the Congress on May 25, 1961, to commit the federal government to a program to land a man on the Moon by the end of the 1960s, which effectively launched the Apollo program.[41]

Apollo was one of the most expensive American scientific programs ever. It cost more than $20 billion in 1960s dollars[42] or an estimated $223 billion in present-day US dollars.[43] (In comparison, the Manhattan Project cost roughly $28.4 billion, accounting for inflation.)[43][44] It used the Saturn rockets as launch vehicles, which were far bigger than the rockets built for previous projects.[45] The spacecraft was also bigger; it had two main parts, the combined command and service module (CSM) and the Apollo Lunar Module (LM). The LM was to be left on the Moon and only the command module (CM) containing the three astronauts would return to Earth.[note 2]

The second crewed mission, Apollo 8, brought astronauts for the first time in a flight around the Moon in December 1968.[46] Shortly before, the Soviets had sent an uncrewed spacecraft around the Moon.[47] On the next two missions docking maneuvers that were needed for the Moon landing were practiced[48][49] and then finally the Moon landing was made on the Apollo 11 mission in July 1969.[50]

The first person to walk on the Moon was Neil Armstrong, who was followed 19 minutes later by Buzz Aldrin, while Michael Collins orbited above. Five subsequent Apollo missions also landed astronauts on the Moon, the last in December 1972. Throughout these six Apollo spaceflights, twelve men walked on the Moon. These missions returned a wealth of scientific data and 381.7 kilograms (842 lb) of lunar samples. Topics covered by experiments performed included soil mechanics, meteoroids, seismology, heat flow, lunar ranging, magnetic fields, and solar wind.[51][page needed] The Moon landing marked the end of the space race; and as a gesture, Armstrong mentioned mankind when he stepped down on the Moon.[52]

Apollo set major milestones in human spaceflight. It stands alone in sending crewed missions beyond low Earth orbit, and landing humans on another celestial body.[53] Apollo 8 was the first crewed spacecraft to orbit another celestial body, while Apollo 17 marked the last moonwalk and the last crewed mission beyond low Earth orbit. The program spurred advances in many areas of technology peripheral to rocketry and crewed spaceflight, including avionics, telecommunications, and computers. Apollo sparked interest in many fields of engineering and left many physical facilities and machines developed for the program as landmarks. Many objects and artifacts from the program are on display at various locations throughout the world, notably at the Smithsonian's Air and Space Museums.

-Skylab (1965–1979)
Main article: Skylab

Skylab in 1974, seen from the departing Skylab 4 CSM.
Skylab was the United States' first and only independently built space station.[54] Conceived in 1965 as a workshop to be constructed in space from a spent Saturn IB upper stage, the 169,950 lb (77,088 kg) station was constructed on Earth and launched on May 14, 1973, atop the first two stages of a Saturn V, into a 235-nautical-mile (435 km) orbit inclined at 50° to the equator. Damaged during launch by the loss of its thermal protection and one electricity-generating solar panel, it was repaired to functionality by its first crew. It was occupied for a total of 171 days by 3 successive crews in 1973 and 1974.[54] It included a laboratory for studying the effects of microgravity, and a solar observatory.[54] NASA planned to have a Space Shuttle dock with it, and elevate Skylab to a higher safe altitude, but the Shuttle was not ready for flight before Skylab's re-entry on July 11, 1979.[55]

To reduce cost, NASA used one of the Saturn V rockets originally earmarked for a canceled Apollo mission to launch the Skylab. Apollo spacecraft were used for transporting astronauts to and from the station. Three three-man crews stayed aboard the station for periods of 28, 59, and 84 days. Skylab's habitable volume was 11,290 cubic feet (320 m3), which was 30.7 times bigger than that of the Apollo Command Module.[55]

-Apollo-Soyuz (1972–1975)
Main article: Apollo-Soyuz

Soviet and American crews with spacecraft model, 1975.
On May 24, 1972, US President Richard M. Nixon and Soviet Premier Alexei Kosygin signed an agreement calling for a joint crewed space mission, and declaring intent for all future international crewed spacecraft to be capable of docking with each other.[56] This authorized the Apollo-Soyuz Test Project (ASTP), involving the rendezvous and docking in Earth orbit of a surplus Apollo command and service module with a Soyuz spacecraft. The mission took place in July 1975. This was the last US human spaceflight until the first orbital flight of the Space Shuttle in April 1981.[57]

The mission included both joint and separate scientific experiments and provided useful engineering experience for future joint US–Russian space flights, such as the Shuttle–Mir program and the International Space Station.

*NASA's Aeronautics Research Mission Directorate conducts aeronautics research.

NASA has made use of technologies such as the multi-mission radioisotope thermoelectric generator (MMRTG), which is 
a type of radioisotope thermoelectric generator used to power spacecraft. Shortages of the required plutonium-238 
have curtailed deep space missions since the turn of the millennium. An example of a spacecraft that was not developed 
because of a shortage of this material was New Horizons 2.
The Earth science research program was created and first funded in the 1980s under the administrations of Ronald Reagan 
and George H.W. Bush.
NASA started an annual competition in 2014 named Cubes in Space. It is jointly organized by NASA and the global education 
company I Doodle Learning, with the objective of teaching school students aged 11–18 to design and build scientific 
experiments to be launched into space on a NASA rocket or balloon. On June 21, 2017 the world's smallest satellite, 
KalamSAT, was launched.

NASA also researches and publishes on climate change. Its statements concur with the global scientific consensus that the 
global climate is warming. Bob Walker, who has advised US President Donald Trump on space issues, has advocated that 
NASA should focus on space exploration and that its climate study operations should be transferred to other agencies such as NOAA. 
Former NASA atmospheric scientist J. Marshall Shepherd countered that Earth science study was built into NASA's mission 
at its creation in the 1958 National Aeronautics and Space Act.[171] NASA won the 2020 Webby People's Voice Award for 
Green in the category Web.

NASA contracted a third party to study the probability of using Free Space Optics (FSO) to communicate with Optical (laser)
 Stations on the Ground (OGS) called laser-com RF networks for satellite communications.

On July 29, 2020, NASA requested American universities to propose new technologies for extracting water from the lunar 
soil and developing power systems. The idea will help the space agency conduct sustainable exploration of the Moon.


* The exhaust gases produced by rocket propulsion systems,
both in Earth's atmosphere and in space, can adversely effect the Earth's environment.
Some hypergolic rocket propellants, such as hydrazine, are highly toxic prior to combustion,
but decompose into less toxic compounds after burning. Rockets using hydrocarbon fuels, such as kerosene, 
release carbon dioxide and soot in their exhaust. However, carbon dioxide emissions are insignificant compared to 
those from other sources; on average, the United States consumed 802,620,000 US gallons (3.0382×109 L) 
of liquid fuels per day in 2014, while a single Falcon 9 rocket first stage burns around 25,000 US gallons (95,000 L) of 
kerosene fuel per launch. Even if a Falcon 9 were launched every single day, it would only represent 0.006% of 
liquid fuel consumption (and carbon dioxide emissions) for that day. Additionally, the exhaust from LOx- and LH2- fueled 
engines, like the SSME, is almost entirely water vapor. NASA addressed environmental concerns with its canceled 
Constellation program in accordance with the National Environmental Policy Act in 2011.[179] In contrast, ion engines use 
harmless noble gases like xenon for propulsion.

An example of NASA's environmental efforts is the NASA Sustainability Base. Additionally, the Exploration Sciences 
Building was awarded the LEED Gold rating in 2010. On May 8, 2003, the Environmental Protection Agency recognized 
NASA as the first federal agency to directly use landfill gas to produce energy at one of its facilities—the Goddard 
Space Flight Center, Greenbelt, Maryland.

In 2018, NASA along with other companies including Sensor Coating Systems, Pratt & Whitney, Monitor Coating and UTRC 
launched the project CAUTION (CoAtings for Ultra High Temperature detectION). This project aims to enhance the temperature 
range of the Thermal History Coating up to 1,500 °C (2,730 °F) and beyond. The final goal of this project is improving 
the safety of jet engines as well as increasing efficiency and reducing CO2 emissions.